
In the late 1980s, the mineral industry worldwide experienced major changes, with state ownership of mines de-emphasized and many mineral-rich developing countries encouraged to put in place policy frameworks that would encourage private participation. International private investor demands for participation in the mining sector were well articulated by various groups including the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). For a country to attract private investment, it must offer, in addition to a promising geological environment, a conducive policy, legislative, and administrative framework that is more conducive to business, and a thorough privatization program. In response to this global demand for policy changes to attract international mining investment, Ghana shifted its focus from direct state investment in the mining sector to promotion and regulation of private companies.

Within the framework of the country's economic recovery program of 1983, and more specifically under its structural adjustment program, the mining sector was a major target for reforms to address the concerns of investors and financiers, to arrest and reverse the fall in the industry and to ensure growth. The main purposes of the privatization program have been: to reduce the role of the state in the economy and to improve business competitiveness and efficiency, to reduce the fiscal deficit by using the proceeds from the sales to retire external and domestic debt, and to generate new cash flows through investment and tax revenues.

The policy changes have achieved the desired results with respect to investor perception of the investment environment and the volume and value of mineral output. The country fast became a citadel of commerce and mining in West Africa. Internationally, Ghana is known now to be among a few selected African countries with the most attractive geological and investment environment. Comparative geological ranking of African countries placed Ghana third after South Africa and Zimbabwe. For the most attractive African countries from the general perspective of mining investment, Ghana is ranked third after Botswana and Zimbabwe respectively. In a political and commercial risk assessment of African countries, Ghana was categorized good enough to risk investment alongside Zimbabwe and Morocco.
